% this file is called up by thesis.tex
% content in this file will be fed into the main document

\chapter{Introduction}
\label{cha:intro}

Perhaps the most elusive subatomic particle known to science is the
Neutrino. With no electrical charge (thus aptly named) and mass
smaller than any other elementary particles, neutrinos pass through
matter making them virtually undetectable. Neutrinos are sought after
by researchers, especially those in the fields of Astrophysics and
Astronomy since they may help gain insights into astronomical events
such as the birth of a neutrino star or a supernova.

When neutrinos experience a change in the density of the matter they
are traveling through (such as going from air into water), they
experience a change in velocity and emit an electron and a photon.
This phenomenon is known as Cherenkov Radiation
\cite{margiotta2014km3net} and is an indirect method which can be used
to detect neutrinos. This remains the premise for some of the worlds
largest neutrino observatories built to date such as the Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory (Ontario, Canada), The Super-Kamiokande (Gifu
Prefecture, Japan) and The IceCube Neutrino Observatory (Antarctica).

The KM3NeT or the Cubic Kilometer Neutrino Telescope is the next
generation neutrino telescope, currently being constructed at the
bottom of the Mediterranean Sea. The goal of this research
infrastructure is two fold. First, to study high energy neutrinos
originating from celestial events in the galaxy. And second, to study
the properties of the neutrino particles produced in the Earth's
atmosphere \cite{adrian2016letter}. The first goal will be realized
with the KM3NeT/ARCA (Astroparticle Research with Cosmics in the
Abyss) telescope and the second with KM3NeT/ORCA (Oscillation Research
with Cosmics in the Abyss) \cite{adrian2016letter}. This paper talks
exclusively about KM3NeT/ARCA.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \centering
  \begin{minipage}{0.74\textwidth}
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{blocks.jpg}
    \caption{Artist's impression of the ARCA detector \textit{source: https://www.km3net.org}}%
    \label{fig:blocks}    
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}{0.24\textwidth}
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{doms.png}
    \caption{An optical detector (DOM) \textit{source: https://www.km3net.org}}%
    \label{fig:doms}    
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure}

\section{Situation of Concern}
\label{sec:soc}

The ARCA telescope comprises of two ``blocks'' with a total volume of
$1km^{3}$. Each block consists of 115 spherical detector units (DOMs)
and each DOM consists of 31 Photo Multiplier Tubes (PMTs) in various
spatial arrangement. Figure \ref{fig:blocks} shows an artist's
impression of ARCA and figure \ref{fig:doms} depicts a DOM along with
the PMTs inside it. The PMTs are highly sensitive to light (photons),
and thus are used to detect the Cherenkov Radiation emitted from the
neutrino particle interactions. All hits are recorded by the PMTs in
the form of analog signals and those above a certain threshold are
digitized. The digital signals from all PMTs are arranged in 100ms
``timeslices'' and sent to the on-shore facility for further
processing \cite{aiello2019km3net}.

Unfortunately, there are several sources of noise like
bioluminescense, decay of Potassium 40 ($^{40}K$) and atmospheric
Muons \cite{post2019km3nnet}. Due to the high level of noise, data is
generated at an extremely high rate of 25GB/sec
\cite{adrian2016letter} and must be filtered and selectively stored
for further analysis. The state of the art for this task are known as
``Event Trigger'' algorithms \cite{adrian2016letter,aiello2019km3net}
which can filter timeslices containing just noise thus only allowing
important timeslices containing neutrino hits to pass through. The
existing event trigger algorithms namely \emph{L1} and \emph{L2}
although able to conduct the filtration in near real time, lack the
ability to do so with high accuracy thus often failing to save
important timeslices \cite{karas2019data}. Efforts have already been
made to improve the existing event trigger algorithms. Karas et al.
(2019) proposed and implemented a GPU powered pipeline which utilizes
correlation and graph community detection to identify time slices that
may contain neutrino hits whilst Post et al. (2019) suggest an
alternate using convolutional neural networks.

\section{User Requirements}
\label{sec:user-req}

The primary users of ARCA are researchers who want to study high
energy particles from outer space. The stakeholders are all member
institutes involved in the project and by extension all scientists
from these institutes who will be working with the data collected. The
requirements of the primary users and stakeholders with respect to the
data acquisition pipeline are as follows.

\begin{enumerate}
  \item[\textbf{UR1}.]\textbf{The accuracy of filtration must be extremely high.}

    Time slices which are deemed important by event trigger algorithms
    are stored for further analysis and research. Failure to store
    timeslices containing information from neutrino events can lead to
    loss of important data and hinder new discovery. Since majority of
    the data generated is noise, the pipeline must be able to prevent
    storage of unnecessary timeslices containing only noise in the
    on-shore facility.

  \item[\textbf{UR2}.] \textbf{Filtration should occur in real time.}

    The state of the art event trigger algorithms are able to process
    data in real time. The proposed alternative should be able to
    provide better data filtration quality whilst maintaining or
    improving upon its predecessor's runtime performance.

\end{enumerate}

\section{Research Question}
\label{sec:rqs}

This report presents research to improve upon the GPU Pipeline
proposed by Karas et al. (2019) to combat the limitations of the L1
and L2 event trigger algorithms. Specifically this project seeks to
answer the following research questions.

\begin{enumerate}
  \item[\textbf{RQ1}.] \textbf{Can the existing GPU pipeline be improved using Neural Networks?}

    Improvement may be achieved by reducing the processing time of the
    pipeline or improving the accuracy with which relevant timeslices
    are identified. This project focuses on achieving improvement via
    accuracy. The task of validating the runtime performance of the
    methods proposed in this paper is left to a separate project. In
    order to answer \textbf{RQ1}, the following additional questions
    are formulated.

  \item[\textbf{RQ2.}] \textbf{Can the \emph{Hit Correlation Step} be replaced with a Multi Layer Perceptron?}

    The first step of the GPU Pipeline is the Hit Correlation Step. A
    novel trigger criterion was proposed which when given a pair of
    points, can quantify their level of correlation with an accuracy
    of 80\%. The first phase of this project focuses on exploring an
    improvement to this trigger criterion using a Multi Layer
    Perceptron (MLP).
    
  \item[\textbf{RQ3.}] \textbf{Can the \emph{Graph Community Detection Step} be replaced with a Graph Convolutional Neural Network?}

    The output of the Hit Correlation Step is used to create a graph
    structure where hits from neutrino and noise are represented as
    nodes connected with an undirected edge carrying the probability
    of correlation as its weight. The Constant Potts clustering
    algorithm, which operates on the principles of Graph Community
    Detection \cite{fortunato2010community}, was used to separate the
    graph into communities of neutrino and noise hits. The second
    phase of this project focuses on achieving a better accuracy for
    clustering neutrino and noise hits into separate communities in a
    given timeslice using Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
    \cite{kipf2016semi}.
\end{enumerate}

The following chapters present the research efforts carried out to
improve The GPU Pipeline using Artificial Neural Networks. In Chapter
\ref{cha:data}, the steps taken to prepare the dataset is presented
followed by its statistical analysis and visual exploration. Since
this research initiative is based on the seminal work conducted by
Karas et al. (2019), an overview of the GPU Pipeline is presented in
Chapter \ref{cha:related-work} in addition to other related projects.
Chapters \ref{cha:mlp} and \ref{cha:gcn} present detailed analysis of
the neural networks created to replace segments of The GPU Pipeline.
Drawing from the results of the replacement models, practical
recommendations and directions for further research are laid out in
Chapter \ref{cha:rec}.

This report is intended for the primary users of ARCA with the hope to
aid in the development of the successor to the state of the art event
trigger algorithms. The report may also be used by deep learning
practitioners working in the field of neutrino detection. This report
assumes the reader posses a background in Computer Science or
Artificial Intelligence and thus is familiar with concepts such as
statistics, linear algebra and optimization. The reader is expected to
have basic understanding of the guiding principals of Deep Learning
such as Feed-Forward Neural Networks, backpropagation, binary
classification and model evaluation metrics.
